---
date: "2021-05-10T11:00:27Z"
tags:
  - writing
title: Staying motivated for writing
---

There are many reasons to write, as I discussed in my previous post. Writing is an essential form of communication, just like speaking. It builds bridges between us, but it's not flawless. We might not be able to transmit every single detail in our minds. Writers are limited with their abilities to use the language while writing what's on their minds. Readers are restricted with their understanding of language and the meanings they give to the words. We could think of digitizing an analog picture by scanning it, the ability to digitize the details on the printed picture is limited to the resolution of the scanner. Unlike these electronic devices, humans can increase the quality of our creations in their lifetimes; by working on their writing skills.

Writing better texts takes practice, though it could be difficult to start. We might have a hard time crafting catchy opening lines while we have lots of ideas for the sentences that could go into the middle of a long essay. Connecting different topics is challenging. Keeping thoughts consistent and switching smoothly between topics is crucial. A poorly organized text makes readers might feel like they're riding on a bicycle on a cobblestone street while reading. Writing is not just creating something, it is also about processing the information. Converting our thoughts into text makes us rethink what we want to tell. I believe improving writing skills can help us to refine our way of thinking.

How did I start practicing? I like to have small goals for starting practicing creative activities like writing. Having to fill half of a computer screen in 5 minutes worked for me. It can be pen and paper too, depending on the size. Writing perfect sentences is not mandatory at the beginning; all we need to do is to let words flow freely without thinking of how consistent or grammatically correct they are. After writing the first draft, we can sort and cluster the sentences by their semantics and fix the grammatical mistakes. Doing this time after time helps to improve the writing performance. Noticing an improvement in quality in time will help us to keep our motivation up.

Besides seeing an improvement in the writing skills, there is one more thing that keeps me motivated: trying new ways or mediums to write. Just like a school kid. Remember your childhood, you might not be super motivated to do your homework; until you get a new pen. Having a new notebook or pen has always motivated me to do my homework. Motivation through having new writing utensils has never lasted for a long time. But, it nudged me to write better. I notice it every time I find my notebooks from elementary school. The first pages are written with nicer handwriting and the rest of the writings look always sloppy.

I want to be a better writer and I know how can I keep myself motivated. What I can not do is produce notebooks or pens once I get bored. Buying new utensils is not sustainable neither. As a software developer, I've gotten inspiration from my childhood to start working on a note-taking application. By working on this side project I'm aiming to nudge myself to write more and improve my way of thinking. Adding new features once and then, as long as I have ideas.
